README.md, before:

iter-duct
=========
[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/tes/iter-duct.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/tes/iter-duct)

iter-duct is a command line tool to execute pipelines, useful for migration scripts and when you have a sequence of items that needs to be transformed and written somewhere.

iter-duct is based on async-iterables (node 10+). It works on a "pull model", and removes many of the complexity of using streams directly.

pipeline and segments
---------------------
A segment is a function that takes a sequence (async iterable) and returns another sequence. You form a pipeline when you set up a series of segments in a specific order.
The first segment of the pipeline acts as a generator: it reads the data somewhere and emits the data as iterable to the next segments.
The last segment of the pipeline is usually in charge of writing the data somewhere else.

why using this
--------------
Every time you write a migration script you are dealing with a few common tasks:

* writing a command line interface or a configuration
* decide what abstraction use for the sequence (array, streams ...)
* dealing with code reusability

iter-duct provides an interface to build a pipeline out of reusable and testable components (pipeline segments).

How to use it
-------------
You add iter-duct to you package:
```
npm install --save iter-duct
```
You can configure your pipeline using a plain javascript file called "iter-duct.conf.js" in the root of your package. You can expose the configuration as array:
```js
const readCSV = require('iter-duct-utils/readCSV')
const writeJSON = require('iter-duct-utils/writeJSON')

module.exports = [
  readCSV({ filename: 'data.csv' }),
  writeJSON({ filename: (data) => `${data.id}.json` }),
]
...
```
and run it with:
```
npx iter-duct
```
or as an object:
```js
const readCSV = require('iter-duct/readCSV')
const writeJSON = require('iter-duct/writeJSON')

module.exports = {  
  migration1: [
    readCSV({ filename: 'data.csv' }),
    writeJSON({ filename: (data) => `${data.id}.json` }),
  ]
}
...
```
and run it with:
```
npx iter-duct -pipeline migration1
```
You can also use a different config file:
```
npx iter-duct --config special.js
```
or you define a script in your package.json:
```
  "scripts": {
    "pipeline": "iter-duct"
  }
```
The default name for a pipeline is "pipeline" but you can use different names:
```
npx iter-duct --pipeline migration-pipeline
```
The pipeline can also be a sync or async function that returns the array. The argument of this function are the command line arguments used to launch iter-duct:
```js
module.exports = async function ({ dbPassword }) {
  const db = await connectToDb(dbPassword)
  return [
    // ... the pipeline
  ]
}
```
that you can run with:
```
npx iter-duct -dbPassword secretpassword
```

Pipeline segment
----------------
You can define a segment using:
* a function that takes an async iterable and returns an async iterable
* an array of functions like above
* a string containing '.': This is replaced by the segment passThrough (it returns the same iterable it got as input)
* a string containing a path expression (the same used by lodash get): This maps the async iterable in input, extracting a field from it
* an object with a segment for each value: this clones the iterable in input and run the iterable through each segment. Then it maps the result using the same keys of the object. This is called "multiplex"

Multiplex is a special segment that combines different segments and zip the results together.
You can use it to return a sequence of arrays that implements multiple segments:

```js
const it = require('iter-tools/es2018')

const logger = (iterable) => {
  for await (const n of iterable) {
    console.log(n)
  }
}

const pipeline = [
  () => [1, 2, 3], // take an iterable and returns an iterable
  { square: it.asyncMap(n => n * n), double: it.asyncMap(n => n * 2) },
  logger
]
```
It will print this sequence:
```js
{ square: 1, double: 1 }
{ square: 4, double: 4 }
{ square: 9, double: 6 }
```

Writing a pipeline segments
---------------------------
A pipeline segment is a reusable unit of code. It is a function that takes the configuration as argument, and returns an async-iterator that takes an iterable as input and returns an iterable:
```js
function doNothing({ filename }) {
  return async function * (iterable) {
    for await (const item of iterable) {
      yield item
    }
  }
}
```
This segment is just a pass-through, but you can:
* filter the iterable
* transform the iterable
* ignore the input iterable and generate a new one (reading data for example)
* write the data coming from an input iterable

An important caveat is that you **always** yield something as output, even if your segment is intended to be the last segment of the pipe.

You can find examples and some useful pipeline segments in iter-duct-utils

Javascript API
--------------
iter-duct exposes a js api too!
```js
const { IterDuct } = require('iter-duct')
const id = new IterDuct(pipeline) // pipeline is aan array of segments as defined in the configuration
id.run() // it runs a pipeline, returns a promise
id.toArray() // it runs the pipeline and returns an array with all items (useful for debugging)
id.iter // contains the composed iterator
```
Once an iterator is consumed by **run** or **toArray** it can't be used anymore.

Special segments
----------------
This library provides a special set of segments:
* multiplex: it takes an array of an object, it duplicates the iterable in input and pass it through a different segment
* getSegment: it takes a segment, an array of segment and it returns a single segment using the rules explained above
* passthrough: it is a simple segment that return the iterable in input
```js
const { multiplex, getSegment, passthrough } = require('iter-duct')
```

tricks
======

#### Running multiple migration segments in parallel
Multiplex can be useful if you can run multiple migration segments at the same time:

```js
{ a: getJSON({ ... }), b: jsonWriter({ ... })}
```

#### Retain the original sequence
or you can use passthrough to retain the original iterable:
```js
[
  ...  
  { a: getJSON({ ... }), b: '.'}
  asyncMap(({ a, b }) => ({
    ...a, id: b.id // I want to reuse the id from the original iterable
  }))
  ...
]
```

#### Start a pipeline with an array (or iterable)
If you want you can start your pipeline with any function that returns an iterable (synchronous or asynchronous):
```js
[
  () => [1, 2, 3, 4],
  getJSON({ url: (item) => `http://www.archive.com/item${item}`}),
  JSONWriter({ filename: (item) => `${item.id}.json`  })
]
```

#### How to generate random sequences
You can combine iter-tools execute and occamsrazor-generate
```js
const it = require('iter-tools/es2018')
const generate = require('occamsrazor-generate')
const chance = require('occamsrazor-generate/extra/chance')

// This returns an infinite sequence of objects. Combine with slice to set a maximum size.
[
  itools.execure(generate({
    x: chance('integer', {min: -20, max: 20}),
    y: chance('integer', {min: -20, max: 20})
  })),
  ...
]
```

Commit message:

from now it is possible to run multiple pipelines

README.md, after:

iter-duct
=========
[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/tes/iter-duct.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/tes/iter-duct)

iter-duct is a command line tool to execute pipelines, useful for migration scripts and when you have a sequence of items that needs to be transformed and written somewhere.

iter-duct is based on async-iterables (node 10+). It works on a "pull model", and removes many of the complexity of using streams directly.

pipeline and segments
---------------------
A segment is a function that takes a sequence (async iterable) and returns another sequence. You form a pipeline when you set up a series of segments in a specific order.
The first segment of the pipeline acts as a generator: it reads the data somewhere and emits the data as iterable to the next segments.
The last segment of the pipeline is usually in charge of writing the data somewhere else.

why using this
--------------
Every time you write a migration script you are dealing with a few common tasks:

* writing a command line interface or a configuration
* decide what abstraction use for the sequence (array, streams ...)
* dealing with code reusability

iter-duct provides an interface to build a pipeline out of reusable and testable components (pipeline segments).

How to use it
-------------
You add iter-duct to you package:
```
npm install --save iter-duct
```
You can configure your pipeline using a plain javascript file called "iter-duct.conf.js" in the root of your package. You can expose the configuration as array:
```js
const readCSV = require('iter-duct-utils/readCSV')
const writeJSON = require('iter-duct-utils/writeJSON')

module.exports = [
  readCSV({ filename: 'data.csv' }),
  writeJSON({ filename: (data) => `${data.id}.json` }),
]
...
```
and run it with:
```
npx iter-duct
```
or as an object:
```js
const readCSV = require('iter-duct/readCSV')
const writeJSON = require('iter-duct/writeJSON')

module.exports = {  
  migration1: [
    readCSV({ filename: 'data.csv' }),
    writeJSON({ filename: (data) => `${data.id}.json` }),
  ]
}
...
```
and run it with:
```
npx iter-duct -pipeline migration1
```
You can also use a different config file:
```
npx iter-duct --config special.js
```
or you define a script in your package.json:
```
  "scripts": {
    "pipeline": "iter-duct"
  }
```
The default name for a pipeline is "pipeline" but you can use different names:
```
npx iter-duct --pipeline migration-pipeline
```
The pipeline can also be a sync or async function that returns the array. The argument of this function are the command line arguments used to launch iter-duct:
```js
module.exports = async function ({ dbPassword }) {
  const db = await connectToDb(dbPassword)
  return [
    // ... the pipeline
  ]
}
```
that you can run with:
```
npx iter-duct -dbPassword secretpassword
```
You can also run multiple pipelines sequentially using:
```
npx iter-duct --pipeline migration1,migration2
```

Pipeline segment
----------------
You can define a segment using:
* a function that takes an async iterable and returns an async iterable
* an array of functions like above
* a string containing '.': This is replaced by the segment passThrough (it returns the same iterable it got as input)
* a string containing a path expression (the same used by lodash get): This maps the async iterable in input, extracting a field from it
* an object with a segment for each value: this clones the iterable in input and run the iterable through each segment. Then it maps the result using the same keys of the object. This is called "multiplex"

Multiplex is a special segment that combines different segments and zip the results together.
You can use it to return a sequence of arrays that implements multiple segments:

```js
const it = require('iter-tools/es2018')

const logger = (iterable) => {
  for await (const n of iterable) {
    console.log(n)
  }
}

const pipeline = [
  () => [1, 2, 3], // take an iterable and returns an iterable
  { square: it.asyncMap(n => n * n), double: it.asyncMap(n => n * 2) },
  logger
]
```
It will print this sequence:
```js
{ square: 1, double: 1 }
{ square: 4, double: 4 }
{ square: 9, double: 6 }
```

Writing a pipeline segments
---------------------------
A pipeline segment is a reusable unit of code. It is a function that takes the configuration as argument, and returns an async-iterator that takes an iterable as input and returns an iterable:
```js
function doNothing({ filename }) {
  return async function * (iterable) {
    for await (const item of iterable) {
      yield item
    }
  }
}
```
This segment is just a pass-through, but you can:
* filter the iterable
* transform the iterable
* ignore the input iterable and generate a new one (reading data for example)
* write the data coming from an input iterable

An important caveat is that you **always** yield something as output, even if your segment is intended to be the last segment of the pipe.

You can find examples and some useful pipeline segments in iter-duct-utils

Javascript API
--------------
iter-duct exposes a js api too!
```js
const { IterDuct } = require('iter-duct')
const id = new IterDuct(pipelines)
// pipelines is an array of pipeline. Every pipeline is an array of segments as defined in the configuration
id.run()
// it runs a pipeline, returns a promise
id.toArray()
// it runs the pipeline and returns an array with all items (useful for debugging)
```
Once an iterator is consumed by **run** or **toArray** it can't be used anymore.

Special segments
----------------
This library provides a special set of segments:
* multiplex: it takes an array of an object, it duplicates the iterable in input and pass it through a different segment
* getSegment: it takes a segment, an array of segment and it returns a single segment using the rules explained above
* passthrough: it is a simple segment that return the iterable in input
```js
const { multiplex, getSegment, passthrough } = require('iter-duct')
```

tricks
======

#### Running multiple migration segments in parallel
Multiplex can be useful if you can run multiple migration segments at the same time:

```js
{ a: getJSON({ ... }), b: jsonWriter({ ... })}
```

#### Retain the original sequence
or you can use passthrough to retain the original iterable:
```js
[
  ...  
  { a: getJSON({ ... }), b: '.'}
  asyncMap(({ a, b }) => ({
    ...a, id: b.id // I want to reuse the id from the original iterable
  }))
  ...
]
```

#### Start a pipeline with an array (or iterable)
If you want you can start your pipeline with any function that returns an iterable (synchronous or asynchronous):
```js
[
  () => [1, 2, 3, 4],
  getJSON({ url: (item) => `http://www.archive.com/item${item}`}),
  JSONWriter({ filename: (item) => `${item.id}.json`  })
]
```

#### How to generate random sequences
You can combine iter-tools execute and occamsrazor-generate
```js
const it = require('iter-tools/es2018')
const generate = require('occamsrazor-generate')
const chance = require('occamsrazor-generate/extra/chance')

// This returns an infinite sequence of objects. Combine with slice to set a maximum size.
[
  itools.execure(generate({
    x: chance('integer', {min: -20, max: 20}),
    y: chance('integer', {min: -20, max: 20})
  })),
  ...
]
```
